<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1"?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.2//EN"
                      "http://www.oasis-open.org/docbook/xml/4.2/docbookx.dtd">

<book lang="en">

	<!-- ================================================================ -->
	<bookinfo>

		<title>NeverBlender Technical Manual</title>

		<abstract>
		<para>This document describes the technical details of
		NeverBlender package, a package intended to make Blender
		modeller and the
		<trademark>Neverwinter Nights</trademark> computer game
		cooperate.</para>
		</abstract>

		<author>
		<surname>Lankinen</surname><firstname>Urpo</firstname>
			<authorblurb>
				<para>E-mail:
				<ulink url="mailto:wwwwolf@iki.fi">wwwwolf@iki.fi</ulink>
				</para>
				<para>WWW:
				<ulink url="http://www.iki.fi/">http://www.iki.fi/wwwwolf/</ulink>
				</para>
			</authorblurb>
		</author>

		<pubdate>$Date$</pubdate>
		<releaseinfo>$Revision$</releaseinfo>

		<copyright><year>2005</year><holder>Urpo Lankinen</holder></copyright>

		<legalnotice>
			<para>NeverBlender package is distributed under an extremely
			free license.</para>

			<para>Basically, the package is © 2003 The NeverBlender
			Contributors. It is copyrighted - not public domain.</para>

			<para>You are allowed to distribute, modify and use the source
			code / scripts in any way you want. However, the copyright
			notices must remain as they are. You may add notes describing
			which parts you have changed to copies you distribute, but this
			copyright notice (and the COPYING and AUTHORS files) must
			accompany the distribution, and all copyright notices on the
			files must remain as they are.</para>

			<para>There is no warranty whatsoever, expressed or implied. You are using
			this software at your own risk!</para>

			<para>This documentation is supplied under the same terms,
			except that electronic or printed versions of the
			documentation need not to be accompanied by the COPYING and
			AUTHORS files, in case the file is distributed separate from
			the whole distribution. This whole copyright notice must be
			present, however.</para>

			<para><trademark>Neverwinter Nights</trademark>
			© 2002 Bioware and Infogrames (Atari). All rights reserved.
			<trademark>Neverwinter Nights</trademark>, 
			<trademark class="registered">Dungeons &amp; Dragons</trademark> and
			<trademark class="registered">Forgotten Realms</trademark>
			are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast.</para>
		</legalnotice>

	</bookinfo>

	<!-- ================================================================ -->
	<chapter>
	<title>Blah blah</title>

	<sect1>
	<title>Something?</title>

		<para>Bleaf.</para>
		
		<para>Things that should be discussed in this manual:
		
		NWN model format in brief.
		How Blender objects relate to NWN objects.
		
		What exporter actually does.
		How the Blender objects are stuffed in Python objects and how
		they in turn are turned into NWN objects.
		</para>

	</sect1>
	</chapter>
</book>

<!--
  Local variables:
  mode:xml
  End:
-->
